       Familias Lógicas
       An Introduction to Digital Logic Familities
       In the beginning (almost) there was diode logic (DL).                   reference



       See a beautiful little DL Demonstrator (local copy) from HyperPhysics
        Level-Shifted Diode Logic Two-Input NAND Gate



                With either input at 0V,
                Vx=0.7 V, DL is just cut off,
                and VOUT = 0 V.


                With both inputs at 1 V,
                VX=1.7 V and VOUT=1 V.




       Then there was resistor-transistor logic (RTL)....
Resistor-Transistor Logia
Two-Input NOR Gate                                    Two-Input NAND Gate


        and diode-transistor logic (DTL).
        A Diode-Transistor Logic (DTL) Two-Input NAND Gate
                                                                                  If all inputs
                                                                                  are high, Vx
                                                                                  = 2.2 V and

                                                                                  the
                                                                                  transistor is
                                                                                  saturated.

                                                                                  If any input
                                                                                  goes     low
                                                                                  (0.2 V), Vx
                                                                                  = 0.9 V
                                                                                  and       the
                                                                                  transistor
                                                                                  cuts off.


                                                                                  The added
                                                                                  resistor R2
                                                                                  provides a
                                                                                  discharge
                                                                                  path      for
                                                                                  stored base
                                                                                  charge in
                                                                                  the BJT, to
                                                                                  provide a
                                                                                  reasonable
                                                                                  L->H
                                                                                  transition
                                                                                  time.
                     930 Series Diode-Transistor Logic Three-Input NAND Gate
Which begat transistor-transistor logic (TTL).
       Basic Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL) Inverter




Basic Multi-emitter TTL Three-Input NAND Gate
                                                  ALL INPUTS HIGH.
                                                ï Q1 is reverse active.
                                                ï QO is saturated.
                                                ï VOL = VCE(sat)
                                                  ANY INPUT LOW.
                                                ï Q1 is saturated.
                                                ï QO is cut off.
                                                ï VOH = VCC




TTL         Switching   or     Transistion      Times
(see illustration)




       Low       to     High        High       to       Low
       Transistion                  Transistion
       The time required to         The             depletion
       discharge    the   Q1        capacitance of the Q1 EB
          depletion layers is <<         junction must discharge;
          1ns.

          The time required to           Base charge must be
          extract the Q2 base            removed   from   the
          charge is also << 1ns:         saturated    Q2
              o Q1        becomes
                 forward active;         Ditto    for       QO
              o IBR       becomes
                 large for Q2
                                         The capactive load must
          Removal of base charge         be charged to VCC.
          from QO is similar to the
          DTL case. With R2 = 1
          k, ts = 10ns (typical
          values for 7400 series
          TTL).




Low-Power Schottky TTL (74LS Series)

                                                           Why go
                                                        back to DTL?
                                                            The
                                                               Schott
                                                               ky
                                                               diodes
                                                               can be
                                                               made
                                                               smalle
                                                               r than
                                                               Q1,
                                                               with
                                                               lower
                                                               parasit
                                                               ic
                                                               capaci
                                                               tances,
                                                               with
      Click on image to enlarge                                post
                                                               1975
                                                               techno
                                                               logy
                                                               (6mm
                                                                      featur
                                                                      es).

                                                                      QS can
                                                                      not
                                                                      satura
                                                                      te, so
                                                                      it    is
                                                                      not
                                                                      necces
                                                                      sary to
                                                                      remov
                                                                      e    its
                                                                      base
                                                                      charge
                                                                      with a
                                                                      BJT.




                                                                      (source)




CMOS and NMOS Logic
See our MOS logic page

References
See     notes    from    Professor     John     Emerson    Ayers      course     on
Digital Integrated Circuits particularly the notes on DTL/TTL (local copy).

See also Inside Logic Gates


This page was prepared and is maintained by R. Victor Jones
Comments                to:             mailto:%20jones.deas.harvard.edu.
Last updated December 11, 2001
   Home                                                                 Tue, 06-01-
                        www.play-hookey.com                             2004
Digital | Logic Families | Digital Experiments | Analog |
Analog Experiments | DC Electronic Theory | Optics | Computers |
Semiconductors | Test HTML

Select the Logic Family you wish to examine:


  [Diode Logic (DL)] [Resistor-Transistor Logic (RTL)] [Diode-Transistor Logic
  (DTL)]
  [Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL)] [Emitter-Coupled Logic (ECL)] [CMOS]


Inside Logic Gates
I have received a number of requests, asking just what goes on inside logic gates to actually
perform logic functions. So, by popular demand, here are the internal schematics of various
gates, as implemented by several different logic families.

I won't cover the internal operation of individual semiconductor devices in these pages,
except to state the basic behavior of a given device under specific conditions. More detailed
coverage of semiconductor physics and internal behavior is a job for another set of pages,
which will come later.



There are several different families of logic gates. Each family has its capabilities and
limitations, its advantages and disadvantages. The following list describes the main logic
families and their characteristics. You can follow the links to see the circuit construction of
gates of each family.

Diode Logic (DL)

          Diode logic gates use diodes to perform AND and OR logic functions. Diodes
          have the property of easily passing an electrical current in one direction, but not
          the other. Thus, diodes can act as a logical switch.

          Diode logic gates are very simple and inexpensive, and can be used effectively in
          specific situations. However, they cannot be used extensively, as they tend to
          degrade digital signals rapidly. In addition, they cannot perform a NOT function,
          so their usefulness is quite limited.
Resistor-Transistor Logic (RTL)

         Resistor-transistor logic gates use Transistors to combine multiple input signals,
         which also amplify and invert the resulting combined signal. Often an additional
         transistor is included to re-invert the output signal. This combination provides
         clean output signals and either inversion or non-inversion as needed.

         RTL gates are almost as simple as DL gates, and remain inexpensive. They also
         are handy because both normal and inverted signals are often available. However,
         they do draw a significant amount of current from the power supply for each gate.
         Another limitation is that RTL gates cannot switch at the high speeds used by
         today's computers, although they are still useful in slower applications.

         Although they are not designed for linear operation, RTL integrated circuits are
         sometimes used as inexpensive small-signal amplifiers, or as interface devices
         between linear and digital circuits.




Diode-Transistor Logic (DTL)

         By letting diodes perform the logical AND or OR function and then amplifying
         the result with a transistor, we can avoid some of the limitations of RTL. DTL
         takes diode logic gates and adds a transistor to the output, in order to provide
         logic inversion and to restore the signal to full logic levels.




Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL)

         The physical construction of integrated circuits made it more effective to replace
         all the input diodes in a DTL gate with a transistor, built with multiple emitters.
         The result is transistor-transistor logic, which became the standard logic circuit in
         most applications for a number of years.

         As the state of the art improved, TTL integrated circuits were adapted slightly to
         handle a wider range of requirements, but their basic functions remained the
         same. These devices comprise the 7400 family of digital ICs.
Emitter-Coupled Logic (ECL)

          Also known as Current Mode Logic (CML), ECL gates are specifically designed
          to operate at extremely high speeds, by avoiding the "lag" inherent when
          transistors are allowed to become saturated. Because of this, however, these gates
          demand substantial amounts of electrical current to operate correctly.




CMOS Logic

          One factor is common to all of the logic families we have listed above: they use
          significant amounts of electrical power. Many applications, especially portable,
          battery-powered ones, require that the use of power be absolutely minimized. To
          accomplish this, the CMOS (Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor) logic
          family was developed. This family uses enhancement-mode MOSFETs as its
          transistors, and is so designed that it requires almost no current to operate.

          CMOS gates are, however, severely limited in their speed of operation.
          Nevertheless, they are highly useful and effective in a wide range of battery-
          powered applications.

Most logic families share a common characteristic: their inputs require a certain amount of
current in order to operate correctly. CMOS gates work a bit differently, but still represent a
capacitance that must be charged or discharged when the input changes state. The current
required to drive any input must come from the output supplying the logic signal.
Therefore, we need to know how much current an input requires, and how much current an
output can reliably supply, in order to determine how many inputs may be connected to a
single output.

La mayoría de familias almacenan una característica común: sus entrada
requieren de una cierta cantidad de corriente para operar correctamente.
CMOS trabajan un poco diferente, pero aún presentan una capacitancia que
debe ser cargada o descargada cuando cambian de estado las entradas. La
corriente requerida para manejar alguna entrada debe llegar de la salida
aplicada suministrada de la señal logica. Por lo tanto necesitamos conocer
cuanta corriente requiere en la entrada y cuanta corriente puede suministrar en
la salida de tal manera saber cuantas entradas se pueden conectar para una
salida simple.

However, making such calculations can be tedious, and can bog down logic circuit design.
Therefore, we use a different technique. Rather than working constantly with actual
currents, we determine the amount of current required to drive one standard input, and
designate that as a standard load on any output. Now we can define the number of standard
loads a given output can drive, and identify it that way. Unfortunately, some inputs for
specialized circuits require more than the usual input current, and some gates, known as
buffers, are deliberately designed to be able to drive more inputs than usual. For an easy
way to define input current requirements and output drive capabilities, we define two new
terms:

Sin embargo, haciendo cálculos puede ser tedioso. Por lo tanto,
nosotros usamos una técnica diferente.



Fan-in
          The number of standard loads drawn by an input to ensure reliable operation.
          Most inputs have a fan-in of 1.

          El número de cargas dibujadas en una entrada asegura punto de
          operación. La mayoría de entradas es de fan-in de 1

Fan-out
          The number of standard loads that can be reliably driven by an output, without
          causing the output voltage to shift out of its legal range of values

          El numero de cargas que pueden ser manejadas de forma buena
          por una entrada, sin causar que la tensión de salida cambie de su
          rango legal de valores

Remember, fan-in and fan-out apply directly only within a given logic family. If for any
reason you need to interface between two different logic families, be careful to note and
meet the drive requirements and limitations of both families, within the interface circuitry.
